[Music]
Starting on March 30th, PBS and WGBY
will bring you the first episode of
Cancer, the Emperor of All Maladies. It
is the latest production from the team
of documentary filmmakers headed by Ken
Burns and it is based on the book The
Emperor of All Maladies, a biography of
cancer written by Dr. Sedharta Muker Gi.
A couple of years back, Dr. Muker G was
in Western Massachusetts to address the
Springfield Public Forum and we taped an
interview with him at the Springfield
Merad Hotel. Now, as we prepare for the
Ken Burns documentary, we want to bring
you this encore presentation of our talk
with Dr. Mukarji about the emperor of
all maladies. Patients would ask me over
and over again, where are we in the war
on cancer? How do we get here and what
happens next? So, my book is really an
attempt to demystify cancer, to explain
where we are and what happens next and
look a little bit at the future. But
ultimately it was driven by these
questions by a patient's question which
is you know to understand the essence of
what cancer is and how we got here and
what happens next. I'm fascinated by the
title you and and I assume your
publishers chose the emperor of all
maladies a biography not a history a
biography of cancer and you do treat
cancer very much as if it were a person.
Well I was careful not to over personify
cancer. I mean obviously cancer is an
illness actually cancer is not one
disease but many diseases. So I was
careful not to over personify it but
that said the subtitle biography came
quite late in the writing of the book
and really it refers to the idea which I
think is a central idea in the book is
the idea of drawing a portrait over
time. Uh you you we look at cancer in
1750 in 1850 in 1950 and then 2050. Um
and how does that portrait change? how
that how does that evolve? So in that
sense you know there is this
biographical element to it in which
you're describing the evolution of the
same idea. Um in in in a human being it
would be the same human being but in the
case of illness it's a cultural idea
social idea biological idea and you're
moving it through time and hence the
title uh biography of cancer. You cite
the first known written reference from
about I believe 4,500 years or so ago,
an Egyptian reference to cancer.
Fascinating that that you were able to
even find that and and make something of
it. Well, we don't we know the word
cancer doesn't exist in in 2500 BC. Uh
but that said, the case description is
remarkably similar to what we might
consider a contemporary case of breast
cancer. Now there are many mysteries in
that in that case. This is a this is a a
crumbling yellow papyrus that comes to
us from 2500 BC was retranscribed in
around 1500 BC. It's an ancient
document. Uh we don't know if it's
cancer but it sure sounds a lot like
cancer particularly breast cancer.
Correct me if I'm wrong. I believe I
read that you spent about 10 years from
start to finish. Seven years seven years
excuse me on this book. What an amazing
amount of time you just immersed
yourself in it. But tell me about the
research. The the research clearly was
was international and in great depth. Um
you know this the the what goes into the
book what went into the book is very
diverse. Uh they range from personal
one-on-one interviews uh with
scientists, but also patients um all the
way to actually visiting a site uh uh to
looking up um tens of thousands of
papers, primary papers, scientific
papers on on cancer and looking up
literature, writings, patient writings.
So a huge uh different variety of
sources. But the most important piece of
all of this is that I had to discover
the history myself. And by that I mean
that I couldn't take a second person's
account of it if it meant I mean for
instance I would travel to certain
locations to experience those locations
myself to in order to construct the
story. And that experience I think was
what ultimately sort of brought this
book together. There's a lot of
Massachusetts in the book. you profile
one particular patient that you you
became quite close to and I'm fascinated
by the story of Sydney Farber who you
call the the father of modern
chemotherapy and you you tell his really
kind of unusual story of how he Yes.
worked. Absolutely. Sydney Farber was a
pathologists and usually pathologists
don't treat patients. They diagnose
diseases. They look in their microscopes
and look at tissues and cells. But
Sydney Farber was more than a
pathologist. uh working in Boston in the
1950s, he began to uh wonder whether he
could treat uh a particularly lethal
fatal version of cancer called acute
lymphablastic leukemia. And he actually
was uh in in in order to do so began to
use chemicals to treat cancer and is
considered one of the fathers of modern
chemotherapy. But even more than that,
more than just inventing chemotherapy or
helping invent chemotherapy with the
help of other people, uh Farber also
launched uh the war on cancer in
collaboration with Mary Lazer. Um and
it's this second contribution that
particularly interested me. How does one
convert, how does Farber become uh
transform his own life from being a
scientist in a laboratory to becoming
this public figure, this lobbyist, this
advocate for cancer research nationally
and internationally. And that's the
story that really is sort of the central
story in the book. In what I found very
interesting toward the end of the book,
you take one presumed cancer patient,
the the Queen Atossa, ancient Persia.
Yes. Who apparently had breast cancer. I
don't think it's quite certain that time
500 BC. And you bring her through the
ages. What would have happened had she
lived a little earlier than she did and
up through the centuries? Very
interesting. What led you to do that?
Well, you know, I had written the book.
I'd almost finished the book and I was
looking for a summary. I mean, how does
one summarize this entire swath of
history? And it seemed to me that well,
one the best way to summarize was to
again do what physicians do is to focus
on a single case. And in this case, of
course, there wasn't a single case. I
mean, no one lives for 4,000 years in
order to summarize the amazing
developments that's happen that have
happened in breast cancer. So what I did
in the end of the book was to perform a
kind of thought experiment. Uh
physicists famously do this kind of
experiment in which they don't really
have someone to to actually do the
experiment but they imagine an
experiment and they sort of walk you
through in time. And so I imagined her
as a kind of a tossa as a kind of
experiment. I said, "Well, you know, if
you take the same woman and you give her
breast cancer in 500 BC or in, you know,
500 AD or in 1,500 AD and so forth and
walk her to through time and ask the
question every century, every five
centuries, ask the question, but what
happens to her? What happens to the same
woman?" And if you do this exercise,
it's a kind of a mental exercise. If you
do the exercise, you all of a sudden
realize that the changes have been
enormous. uh what seemed like small
little changes, iterative changes begin
to add up and change. You know, as I
point out in the book, Tossa, if she was
diagnosed at 47 in 500 BC, may have had
some kind of crude surgery, may not have
had surgery, and she would have died of
breast cancer. Um in 2011,
that whole spectrum is transformed. She
has surgery, radiation, chemotherapy,
targeted therapy, all these things. Her
children are screened. um her daughters
are screened and maybe protected from
having breast cancer ever in their
lifetime. I mean what a transformation
in just that illness breast cancer
across the span of about 200 2,000 years
pardon me. There are as you point out so
many different kinds of cancer so many
ways it can mutate and become immune to
treatments and defy treatment. Can you
even imagine I'm mimicking the the
patients you said who really led you to
the book in a way but a time when a cure
will really be found for all cancers or
or will it be more of a a
treatment and management of this
disease? I'm pretty confident it's going
to be a treatment and management
situation for cancer. First of all, I
doubt that we will ever find a cure for
all cancers. Uh this was an idea very
popular in the 1970s that there would be
it was called the penicellin for cancer.
Um just like penicellin cures many forms
of infectious diseases. People thought
you could you know use similar kind of
magical reagent magic bullet against all
cancers. I s I strongly doubt that that
will happen. I I suspect that we will
bite away at this problem piece by
piece. Breast cancer will be treated
with a different series of medicines. um
brain cancers with a different series of
medicines, surgery, radiation,
chemotherapy, all of these combined
together. And in many cases, we'll never
be able to cure the cancer altogether,
but we're able to transform the cancer
into a chronic disease. Now, I mean,
look at diabetes. That's a great
example. I mean, before the in before
the discovery of insulin, uh the
medicine that we use primarily to treat
diabetes, although there are other
medicines, diabetes was often a fatal
disease. Now, we have thousands,
hundreds of thousands of men and women
living with diabetes but not dying of
diabetes but living with diabetes. Uh
look at the case of chronic heart
disease. So there are many examples in
which the conversion of an illness from
acute and lethal to chronic and
non-lethal have been very important just
as important as curing them outright.
Dr. Sedartha Mukerji, thank you for your
time sir. My pleasure. Thank you so
much.
[Music]